---
layout: post
title:  "Are There Groups of Crohn's Disease Patients with Similar Faecal Calprotectin Patterns Over Time?"
date: 2023-04-06 10:00:00-0000
tags: calprotectin crohn's-disease
categories: PhD
comments: true
img: "fcal"
---

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/fcal-800.webp" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true%}
<br>
People with Crohn's disease are likely to be very familiar with faecal
calprotectin kits; these tests use a stool sample to determine the amount of
gastrointestinal inflammation a person has. Gastroenterologists often use the
results from these kits to assist with determining how active a person's
Crohn's disease is without needing that person needing to undergo a colonoscopy. 

We know it is crucial faecal calprotectin is kept low early after diagnosis to
improve the likelihood a Crohn's disease patient is going to have a good
outcome. My colleagues at the University of Edinburgh and NHS Lothian have
previously shown having a calprotectin below $$250 \; (\mu g/g)$$ a year after
diagnosis reduces the likelihood of the disease worsening and patients being hospitalised or requiring surgery {% cite Plevris2021 --file lcmm %}. However, this previous work did
not consider calprotectin as a measurement which changes continuously over time
and instead ony considered two measurements for each person measured a year
apart. 

We believed that across people with Crohn's disease, there were likely common
patterns of faecal calprotectin over time. To the best of our knowledge, no
previous research had attempted to determine if we can group people with Crohn's
disease with other Crohn's disease patients with similar calprotectin over time.
Recently, colleagues and I have attempted to determine how many groups with
their own shared calprotectin patterns can be reliably found, what these
patterns look like, and if being in one of these groups are potentially affected
by the data known at diagnosis {% cite Constantine_Cooke_2023 --file lcmm %}.

For our study, we considered the calprotectin of 356 people with Crohn's disease
and followed them from diagnosis for five years. We have used highly flexible
statistical models, known as latent class mixed models with natural cubic
splines, to determine the number of groups with distinct calprotectin patterns
and their appearance.

We found four distinct groups which are presented below and largely
reflect what is seen by gastroenterologists in clinics. Three of the groups can
be broadly described as having overall decreasing calprotectin over time with
the fourth group (cluster 2) having consistently high calprotectin. It is highly
likely there are patients in this latter group who would have benefitted from
receiving more advanced therapies sooner and also patients who would have always
had aggressive disease regardless of the treatment they received. We are
interested in determining which patients this is the case for in the future.  <br><br>

{% include figure.html path="assets/img/traj-800.webp" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true%}
<br>
<p class = "text-sm text-red-400">
    The four distinct calprotectin profiles we found. The gray lines are the
    calprotectin measurements for each subject deemed to have a similar profile
    to the red curve. 
</p>

Of the data which are typically available at diagnosis, only smoking status and the
presence of upper gastrointestinal inflammation were found to be significantly
associated with which group a patient was assigned to. Smokers were more likely
to be assigned to class 1 or 2  whilst people with upper gastrointestinal
disease were less likely to be assigned to class 1. Whilst smokers being
assigned to class 2 makes sense as smoking is highly associated with worse
disease outcomes in Crohn's disease, we do not fully understand the association
we found between smoking and class 1. However, this may be due to smokers in
class 1 giving up smoking after being diagnosed. Unfortunately, we do not have
data for whether patients gave up smoking, and this is simply a theory. 

We found early biologic treatment being very highly associated with class
membership with those in class 2 being less likely to receive early biologic
treatment than the other groups. However, We were unable to accurately predict
class membership using all variables available at diagnosis and data science
techniques (random forest and multinomial logistic regression).

Overall, we have shown latent class mixed models are an excellent tool for
finding subgroups of people with Crohn's disease with shared calprotectin
profiles and determining these profiles in a data-driven manner (rather than asking
patients which diagram shown to them best described their disease).

We are currently working on expanding this work to include all ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease patients treated by the Edinburgh IBD Unit and model
both CRP and calprotectin. 

Our long-term goal is to develop a tool which will predict a
patient's risk of surgery, hospitalisation, or worsening disease based on
symptoms, calprotectin, and other measures which will then  update as additional
measurements are taken. This could then help clinicians when making decisions
such as which treatment plan to place a patient on and how closely a patient
should be monitored. 

----------
<br>
<p class = "text-2xl">References</p>


<br>

{% bibliography --cited_in_order --file lcmm %}